SGP2018 abstract

Why workers protest? Economic opportunities and workers’ collective action in Poland 2004–2016

The official data on the industrial conflict in Poland do not allow in-depth studies of the labor movement and workplace struggles. It is a consequence of both the construction of the inadequate legal framework and transformations within broader economy and labor organizations themselves. According to radicalization hypothesis, weakness of trade unions and social dialogue institutions should lead to radicalization of industrial conflict. The official data focuses on strikes, a form of contention that is very costly in terms of both organizational, material and cultural resources. Those seem to be lacking in the Polish labor movement. What happens then?
The study is based on a statistical analysis of a database of over 2000 protest events organized by or on behalf of Polish workers in years 2004–2016. Data was collected from major daily newspapers using protest event analysis methodology. We study the material using the notion of opportunity structures commonly employed in sociology of social movements and statistical analysis to show how context shapes workers’ contentious activities. The opportunity structure theory identifies structural factors that influence actors’ ability and will to mobilize and also the repertoire of such mobilization. We discuss the possible convergence between sociology of industrial relations and POS in a framework of opportunieis for labor mobilization. It is used to overcome the limitations of liberal notion of political opportunities and to show how does the organization of the labor process shapes workers’ responses to exploitation. Analysis of protest data shows where workers can and do organize: what are their grievances and forms of action. It also shows the opposite, the social and economic spaces where there is no collective resistance (or, at least, it is invisible for our methodology). This, in consequence, allows us to track characteristics of workplaces or sectors that shape the chances for labor mobilization and its form.
